feat: add the chempile instruction blog (#28)
lamalab-org/lamalab.github.io: content/posts/chempile_instruction.md

header_image: "instruction_image_1.svg"
---

[the chempile collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/jablonkagroup/chempile-6824e88c60d3286ba9b0dae1), shown in the figure below, represents the largest chemistry-focused dataset collection available. originally containing over 75 billion tokens spanning all chemistry education levels, from high school to research literature, it serves as an exceptional resource for training chemistry domain language models. however, the original chempile did not include instruction-following tasks, which are essential for training language models.

![datasets token count](/images/posts/instruction_image_2.svg)

> *figure 1. token count of bigger chemistry datasets.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*figure 1. token count of the largest chemistry datasets.*
```

    ```markdown
    Use formal, encyclopedic English resembling Wikipedia.
    Original text:
    {text}

    Now, rephrase this text into a multi-turn conversation about chemistry.
    ```

  - **hard**: the conversations have to be written in an obscure and complex style, with many technical terms and jargon.

    ```markdown
    Use esoteric vocabulary and complex syntax suitable for academics.
    Original text:
    {text}

    Now, rephrase this text into a multi-turn conversation about chemistry.
    ```

  - **engaging**: the conversations have to be written in an engaging and interactive style, with questions and answers that encourage participation.

    ```markdown
    Present information in a clear yet engaging manner, suitable for a broad audience.
    Original text:
    {text}

    Now, rephrase this text into a multi-turn conversation about chemistry.
    ```

  - **none**: the model is not asked to follow any specific style, and the conversations are generated in a more natural way (at least for the model).

    ```markdown
    Original text:
    {text}

    Now, rephrase this text into a multi-turn conversation about chemistry.
    ```

>   we processed documents in 10k batches via openai's batch api with structured outputs to enforce consistent conversation formats. each conversation contains message lists (with "user"/"assistant" roles) and dual tagging (following Mirza et al.[^ref3]) for required skills and chemical subdomains. the schema implemented was:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  we processed documents in 10k batches via openai's batch api with structured outputs to enforce consistent conversation formats. each conversation contains message lists (with "user"/"assistant" roles) and tagging (following Mirza et al.[^ref3]) for required skills and chemical subdomains. the schema implemented was:
```

table 1 shows a comparison of general and chemistry-specific instruction-following datasets, illustrating the scale and domain diversity of the chempile-instruction dataset relative to other resources. chempile-instruction achieves a favorable scale-conversation length ratio, compensating for its smaller scale relative to other chemistry datasets. regarding data sources, chempile-instruction exhibits greater diversity through textbooks, course transcripts, research papers, and reasoning traces. conversely, general datasets predominantly focus on news, literature, and wiki articles, with notable absence of books or long documents.

however, general datasets benefit from real conversational sources, whereas chempile-instruction relies on rephrased documents. llasmol further contrasts by using templated tabular data with limited diversity.

![embeddings comparison](/images/posts/instruction_image_3.svg)

*figure 2. comparison of the embeddings of the different datasets. the embeddings were produced with the model [qwen3-embedding-0.6b](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B) sampling 1000 rows for each dataset.*

> figure 2 compares the embeddings of different datasets. this comparison highlights how chempile-instruction achieves greater diversity in its latent space compared to other datasets. this divergence likely stems from chempile-instruction's exclusion of smiles and other tabular data, instead prioritizing long documents and dialogues. consequently, chempile-instruction better supports general chemistry instruction tasks, while smolinstruct targets specialized applications like property/reaction prediction.

Reviewer: how can diversity come by excluding something?
